Peter: It's a sad fact that human beings have
a shocking propensity for conflict. It’s
estimated in the last century, 230 something
million people were killed in war and most
of them were non-combatants. Many rich countries
now are pushing really hard into robotic technology
to reduce soldier casualty rates, and developing
so called smart weapons, which will reduce
the deaths of non-combatants. So, right now,
these robots are not fully autonomous. There
is a human being responsible for actually
firing the weapon and causing harm or death
to another human being. But there seems to
be a growing pressure to take that human being
out of the firing loop, and to actually have
robots making autonomous decisions about whether
they kill human beings or not. So, what is
ethics have to say about this situation?
Doug: I think the term moral agency is important
here. What moral agency is, is does that robot
or that individual have the capacity to make
a decision whether it's right or wrong.
Peter: Okay but human beings struggle with this. So, how would we expect the machine to be able to do that?
Doug: Well, probably, they don't. They don't
at this point. So, without moral agency, then
ethics isn't applied in this context against the machine. So, the machine is neither ethical nor unethical.
Peter: Because it cannot tell right from wrong?
Doug: It has no moral agency but what that
means though is that if that's the machine
without moral agency, then we come back to
the person running or programming the machine.
They become liable for that moral agency.
So, it just falls back. And so that individual,
those engineers or that robot designer is
the one that has the ethical responsibility.
Peter: Okay because of the machine that they
have created, does not have this…
Doug: There's not have moral agency, correct.
Peter: …the responsibility is back on the
person who either created it or deployed it.
Doug: Yes. There's quite a literature I just
discovered on this. They are robot ethics
and machine ethics… there's quite a bit
out there on this that debates this back and
forth as you well know. We've talked about
this a little bit. So, for me, that is the
defining construct. It's moral agency.
Peter: I know it's a topic that in the robotics
community, we talk a little bit about it.
I don't think we talked about it nearly enough
but this is the one that really seems to get
people excited or angry, is this idea of robots
in warfare. It already starting to cause a
lot of contention.
Doug: That doesn't surprise me. And Hollywood,
of course, has just done wonders with that,
with the Arnold Schwarzenegger series, with
the robots taking over the world. It's been
a common theme for ages.
Peter: Absolutely. It's the recurring theme
in all robot movies.
Doug: Yes. Here, we've just discussed beforehand
Asimov, Isaac Asimov and his 1942 short story.
The short story is called Runaround.
Peter: Absolutely. This brings in his famous
roles of robotics, yes?
Doug: Exactly. Shall I read them?
Peter: Yes.
I discovered just this recently. So, he's got four laws. A new law was just added.
Peter: The zeroth law.
Doug: Yes. According to these, all robots
should understand all circumstances and obey
these laws.
1. A robot may not injure a human being, or
through inaction, allow a human being to be
harmed.
2. A robot must obey orders it receives from
human beings, except when such orders conflict
with this first law.
Yes, that one's harming.
3. A robot must protect its own existence
as long as such protection does not conflict
with the first or second law.
In other words, harming humans. There's another
one. Asimov added the fourth.
4. No robot may harm humanity, or through
inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.
So, this sets the basis for some of the machine
ethics discussion, which is fascinating but
I go back to moral agency.
Peter: So, if a machine had these rules encoded
in its control computer, would that robot
have moral agency?
Doug: If it could make that decision, yes.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: Yes, good point. It would. And at that
point, then we have ethical or unethical behavior.
Peter: What robots today currently lack is
the ability to be able to make… first of
all, sufficiently well understand what's going
on in the world but I think also, to understand
the consequences of their actions, to predict
into the future. ‘If I did this, then it
would cause harm or injury to a human being’.
Doug: Yes.
Peter: We're a long, long way off that in
robotics. We would need to have that kind
of capability in order to implement something
like these laws of robotics.
Doug: Absolutely, yes. What surprises me is
how fast we’ve come Peter, and you of all
people would know that. The speed of what
you guys are doing in terms of robotics is staggering.
Peter: We have come a long way but I think
we have got an awfully long way to go. I think
just in terms of perceiving the state of world
we’ve got a lot of work to do there. In
order to figure out the consequences of our
actions, robotically, yes I think that's a
huge body of work yet to be done there.
Doug: Yes. Yes, I agree.